From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
[music]
>> With a single monumental action expected
today,
the Trump administration will eliminate
its own legal authority to fight climate
change.
My colleague, Lisa Friedman, has spent
the past few weeks piecing together
[music] the inside story of how a small
group of activists turned that once
improbable goal into [music] reality.
>> [music]
>> It's Thursday,
February 12th.
Lisa, welcome back to The Daily. Thank
you. Thanks for having me. So, over the
summer, Lisa, you broke the story that
the Trump administration was planning to
roll back
the legal basis for the entire
government's ability to regulate
greenhouse gases. Just remind us what
that legal basis was and why its
elimination
would be so consequential. Sure.
It's called the endangerment finding,
and you can think of it like the spine
of America's ability to regulate climate
pollutants.
Congress never explicitly told the EPA
that it could regulate planet-warming
emissions. But in 2007,
the Supreme Court ruled in a landmark
ruling, it's called Massachusetts versus
EPA, that greenhouse gases
qualify as pollutants under the law.
And because EPA is required to set
limits, required to regulate damaging
pollutants,
the court told the agency, you need to
determine whether these greenhouse
gases,
carbon dioxide, methane, others, whether
they endanger health and welfare. Mhm.
Two years later, the EPA, citing a
massive body of scientific evidence,
came out with
what is now called the endangerment
finding, that six greenhouse gases do
pose a danger to public health and the
environment. And therefore should be
regulated.
>> should be regulated. So, if you think of
the endangerment finding as the spine,
that is what has allowed for regulations
on carbon emissions from automobiles,
from power plant smokestacks, methane
from oil and gas well leaks.
And if you repeal the endangerment
finding, as the Trump administration is
about to do, then there is no basis,
there's no legal basis or scientific
basis
for regulating greenhouse gas emissions
in the United States. The government
essentially gives up its authority. And
not to mix metaphors, but when the
endangerment finding goes away, all of
these regulations that stem from it fall
like a house of cards.
Right. And during our first
conversation, when you first explained
all this to our listeners, Lisa,
you had told me that the efforts to
eliminate the endangerment finding, and
to fundamentally defang the legal
framework
behind how we regulate greenhouse gases,
all of that had unfolded behind closed
doors. It was very hard to understand
how it had happened, and who was
involved in it. But now, all these
months later, you have reporting on what
exactly that behind-the-scenes effort
looked like, and notably who was doing
this behind the scenes work. So, tell us
about what you found.
So, it was pretty stunning to see how
quickly and comprehensively the Trump
administration moved to
reverse the endangerment finding. As
soon as President Trump got into office,
it was one of the early moves in in
January 2025 to tell the EPA to make a
ruling on whether to reconsider this
finding.
And what our reporting showed was this
wasn't just an accident. This wasn't
just years of persistence
coming to fruition. That happens
sometimes in Washington.
This was made possible by a very small
group
of highly trained conservative lawyers
who had spent years working in secret to
prepare for the moment when a Republican
president could obliterate the
government's ability to regulate climate
change. So, who are these people, these
conservative lawyers you're talking
about?
It really starts with two people, Mandy
Gunasekara and Jonathan Brightbill. The
Green New Deal is not a serious
proposal. It reads like Karl Marx's
Christmas list and is a Soviet-style
central planning document calling for a
government takeover of the agricultural,
transportation, housing, and health care
sectors. Gunasekara has a very long
history fighting climate policies about
climate change climate policies. She
used to work for Senator Jim Inhofe, who
wrote a book called The Greatest Hoax,
The Global Warming Conspiracy. In case
we have forgotten because we keep
hearing that 2014 has been the warmest
year on record, I asked the chair, do
you know what this is? It's a snowball.
And he one day threw a snowball on the
Senate floor in February to prove that
climate change was not a thing.
And that's just from outside here. So,
it's very very cold out, very
unseasonal. So, here Mr. President,
catch this.
Mhm.
Gonna Suckara is the the aid who handed
him that snowball, and that's one of the
things she is pretty well known for in
in Washington. Huh.
She enters the first Trump
administration where she is instrumental
in
pushing for the United States to
withdraw from the Paris Agreement, which
President Trump eventually did. Mhm.
During the Biden administration, she
argued strenuously against policies that
he put in place to reduce emissions from
automobiles and power plants and the
rest. From day one, he's held true to
that promise to quote shut down fossil
fuel, and he and the Democrats have
taken over 100 actions aimed at making
it harder for oil and gas to be
developed and delivered to market. She's
actually making the argument that
policies to address climate change are
more harmful than climate change itself.
It's not climate change that farmers nor
Americans should be worried about, it's
the policies being pushed in the name of
climate change that stand to do far much
more damage. Her partner in trying to
repeal the endangerment finding was an
attorney named Jonathan Brightbill.
Before the Supreme Court will be the
question of what limits exist in Clean
Air Act section 111 D1. He had served in
the Justice Department under the first
Trump administration. Everyone we have
talked to has described him as a very
sharp legal mind who really knows his
way around the Clean Air Act, Clean
Water Act. The hinge issue can really
succinctly be stated as follows. Does
EPA have the authority to determine the
emissions rate based on what's
achievable by what EPA thinks is the
best system of emissions reduction,
period.
And has made the argument in court that
Democratic administrations have really
overreached in their efforts to impose
regulations to address climate change.
He was essentially dealing with the
downstream effects of the endangerment
finding. And it makes your head spin to
try and parse through the various
clauses and instructions that are
contained there. Because of the
endangerment finding, EPA has been
dealing with a whiplash of regulations.
They have been created in Democratic
administrations, erased in Republican
administrations,
and fought in courts the entire time.
Mhm. Withdrawing the endangerment
finding eliminates the situation
entirely.
And that's what Gunasekara and
Brightbill plotted to do. And how do
they actually go about doing that? So,
in the summer of 2022,
Gunasekara and Brightbill start seeking
funding for a big new project.
They want to create a secret operation
to kill the endangerment finding.
>> [music]
>> They pitched conservative organizations.
They asked for about $2 million
for
the ability to work on scientific
studies and research from scientists who
disagree with the mainstream science.
They would start laying out the legal
case for repealing the endangerment
finding. All of these things were things
that could be used by a next Republican
president, they [music] hoped Donald
Trump, on day one. They did eventually
receive funding from a conservative
organization, the Heritage Foundation.
The Heritage Foundation would go on to
lead Project 2025, the blueprint for the
next Republican president, and Mandy
Gunasekara wrote the EPA chapter for
Project 2025.
So, these two lawyers, Gunasekara and
Breibill, they are ensuring that this
cause of rolling back environmental
regulations, of going after the
endangerment finding, that [snorts] it
gets taken up by a major conservative
think tank in Heritage with a ton of
influence in Republican politics.
Exactly right.
Then in tandem, we have two other
lawyers, much more high-profile figures,
who are working in their own right to
bring down the endangerment finding. And
who is that? Russ Vought
and Jeff Clark. Much better known.
Much better known figures. Russell
Vought, as we know, during the Biden
years starts the starts a a think tank
of his own, the Center for Renewing
America, where he they were keeping the
MAGA movement alive. Mhm.
Jeff Clark has been in the fight against
the endangerment finding
for decades. EPA, it seems to me, is too
big, it's bloated on stimulus money, and
it seems hell-bent on expansion. Before
there ever was an endangerment finding,
he went to court to argue that the EPA
doesn't have and shouldn't have the
legal authority to address greenhouse
gases. It doesn't matter to EPA if it's
absurd, if its regulations are going to
lead to absurd consequences that inflict
massive harm on the national economy. He
loses that, and that from from
everything we have been told is really a
motivating factor for years with Jeff
Clark, what he sees as righting a wrong.
Of course, the other thing Jeff Clark is
known for, and I think a lot of our
listeners will remember this, is that at
the end of the first Trump term, he
emerges from deep within the Justice
Department as an ally of President Trump
in trying to overturn the 2020 election.
So much so that Trump briefly considers
making him the acting attorney general,
and that so scares people at the
Department of Justice that many of them
threaten to quit if it happens.
President backs down, but Clark becomes
known as a major
election denier.
That's right. And so, by late 2022,
2023,
Jeff Clark and Russ Vought are ensconced
in a rowhouse in Capitol Hill that
Vought had complained was infested with
pigeons,
and drafting executive orders for a new
president to use to eliminate climate
protections. And then, at the same time,
Guna Sekhara and Brightbill are
collecting what they have called an
arsenal of information to support the
repeal of the endangerment finding.
>> [music]
>> Sure enough, President Trump wins the
presidency.
Three out of four of the people that
we're talking about here, Brightbill,
Clark, and Vought, go back into the
administration,
Mhm.
and are able to hand the president
a very clear roadmap for the biggest
climate deregulation in American
history. And that's what's being
followed right now.
>> [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So, Lisa, once a bunch of these
advocates of repealing the endangerment
finding end up inside the White House
and in a position to actually repeal it,
what's the technical case, what's the
legal case that they make to try to do
that?
So,
remember I told you that the Obama
administration wrote the endangerment
finding because the Supreme Court
said, "In order to regulate these gases,
you need to determine that these are
harmful to human health and the
environment."
>> Mhm.
So, now this administration, the Trump
administration,
is looking at that finding and they're
saying,
"The science
that you used is something we don't
agree with." And they're saying, "The
legal rationale is problematic." Hm. So,
start with the science. Why do they
dispute the science? And is it
compelling? So,
they have made the case that the
predictions that were made about the
impacts of climate change back in 2009
were too pessimistic. Their evidence to
support that claim
is a report that five handpicked
climate contrarians wrote in secret for
the Department of Energy
last year. It was designed to
support the repeal of the endangerment
finding and, no surprise to anyone, the
conclusion was that
climate change threats have been
overblown. Interesting. And what
multitudes of scientists have told us
are two things. Yeah, the planet is
better off than what was predicted in
2009 because the international community
has acted. Not enough, not fast enough,
but has done work towards reducing
emissions.
But what's also true is that
every bit of emissions that enters the
atmosphere
leads to more warming, which leads to
more health impacts,
and all of the things that we know
continue to endanger
human health and the environment.
Scientists say that that research is
even more ironclad today
than it was in 2009. Hm.
Then there's the Trump administration's
legal arguments for repealing the
endangerment finding.
There's a couple.
Take a step back. The endangerment
finding, that flowed from a law, the
1970 Clean Air Act.
The EPA is arguing
that the Clean Air Act
only allows EPA to regulate what it
calls local and regional pollutants.
Things like soot
from industrial sources, factories,
power plants, stuff that's really bad
when you breathe it in. Mhm.
Greenhouse gas emissions don't work that
way.
Carbon dioxide, methane, you know, all
these gases, they disperse into the
atmosphere.
They trap heat. They linger from decades
to centuries
and alter the climate. Hm. So this EPA
is is making the argument that it just
does not have
the legal authority to deal with those
kinds of, let's call them global
pollutants.
Interesting. So their argument is that
the endangerment finding misunderstand
the Clean Air Act
and thinks that you can regulate
greenhouse gases that by definition are
not local. They end up in the sky. They
end up far from their original source
and therefore the endangerment finding
is not legally sound. Exactly.
Do lawyers agree with that argument?
They're mixed. I mean, there are some
conservative lawyers who think that the
EPA has a really good
case to make. You know, environmental
attorneys that we've we've spoken to
have said that the George W. Bush
administration made similar arguments
to defend its decision not to issue an
endangerment finding and lost.
But there's another argument that's
linked. Mhm.
Since 2009, the Supreme Court has
repeatedly ruled against environmental
regulations that require big
transformational changes to industry and
the economy.
And so the Trump administration
is saying, based on that new legal
landscape
and the fact that so many of the
regulations that have stemmed from the
endangerment finding
require, in their view, sweeping
technology economic changes. Mhm.
They're arguing that the source, the
endangerment finding
should be overturned.
Fascinating. If so many regulations that
flow from the endangerment finding
eventually get struck down by the
Supreme Court, then the fruit of those
regulations, the finding itself, should
itself be seen as illegal. Unless
Congress explicitly gives the EPA
authority to regulate greenhouse gas
emissions, which after decades they have
never done.
And this Congress is very unlikely to
ever give it that power.
Definitely not.
Okay, so now that we understand the
Trump administration's
arguments here just explain
how they're going to turn those
arguments into the end of the
endangerment finding. What do we expect
the administration to do to end the
finding?
So what we expect is on Thursday, the
administrator of the EPA, Andrew
Wheeler,
who has said that he plans to drive a
dagger through the heart of the climate
change religion, his words,
will announce the end of the
endangerment finding. But it's not the
end of the story. Meaning?
Environmental groups, states, are going
to immediately sue.
And this will be played out in the
courts over the next several years. And
what do we expect will happen in the
courts and just how high up in the
courts is this likely to go?
Well, that's the thing. We know what the
group that we've been talking about, the
the folks who laid out this road map,
hope to see. And that is that this case
gets before the Supreme Court.
And if that happens, there is a lot of
hope in the conservative movement that
the landmark
climate change case, Massachusetts
versus EPA,
could be overturned or significantly
weakened.
So, their hope is that the endangerment
finding ends up before the Supreme Court
in such a way that a conservative
majority of the Supreme Court would
overturn the original Supreme Court
ruling that allows the endangerment
finding to have ever come into
existence. You hit the nail on the head.
And if that happens,
a future president would not be able to
reinstate regulations addressing
greenhouse gas emissions unless and
until Congress explicitly said, "Go do
that."
And let's presume for just a moment,
Lisa, that our legal system
does allow the endangerment finding to
go away.
I want to talk about the repercussions
of that on the environment, on industry,
and let's just start with the impact
on industry that now operates under
these regulations that I presume
suddenly would start to go away.
Well, one thing that industry would get
is the certainty that it has said it
always wants, right? It would know that
it would not face
what has been a decade and a half of
whiplash. Democrats come in and start to
regulate power plants and automobiles
and the rest, and then a Republican
administration comes in and removes or
weakens them. Mhm. [clears throat]
There would be a new playing field, and
it would not include regulatory
restrictions.
So, the question is, will this lead to
industries polluting more?
>> Right. And yeah, we we don't know. I
mean, it is certainly possible that
because
companies have already put billions of
dollars into clean technology, whether
it's for EVs or pollution controls in
power plants,
that they will continue to do so.
There's also
public pressure and you know, companies
very much care about how they are seen
and whether they're stepping up to a
challenge like climate change.
But the reality is, left completely
unshackled as this EPA is about to do,
we don't really know how industry will
react. Well, given that uncertainty,
what would the elimination of the
endangerment finding
mean for the environment and for climate
change writ large? Is that suddenly now
pretty much in the hands
of industry?
It's such a hard question to answer. I
mean,
yes. And part of the reason why is that
the Trump administration has already
pretty effectively
restricted some of the things that
states can do
to address climate change on their own.
Like what? California is the only state
in the country that can set more
stringent environmental regulations than
the federal government.
It needs a waiver to do that. California
tried to set even stricter
automobile emissions rules. They had a
plan to eliminate the sales of
combustion engine vehicles, you know, in
the next decade or so. But the Trump
administration
and Congress rescinded that waiver. I
can't see California getting another
waiver at least during the next 3 years.
Mhm. So, that really ties the hands of
not just California, but other
like-minded states that might want to do
something very ambitious on automobiles.
So in the absence of major new state
regulation and a federal government that
doesn't want to regulate most of these
greenhouse emissions at all, what do
scientists say that the world starts to
look like? Scientists are worried. I
mean the United States is the largest
historic emitter of climate change. It's
the second largest annual emitter of
carbon pollution and greenhouse gases.
If the US is not doing its part,
a lot of countries could start to wonder
why should they? And the most important
is China. And that's the big fear that a
lot have have relayed to me. If the
United States is is successful in not
just failing to reduce its own
emissions, but convincing other
countries that they don't need to
either,
scientists feel that could have a really
dangerous domino effect for the planet.
And where do those dominoes eventually
fall?
I mean they they fall in more severe
rising temperatures and more droughts
and hotter droughts, more frequent and
severe wildfires, rising sea levels from
melting glaciers that are threatening
coastal communities. These kinds of
changes also directly damage human
health, scientists tell us. They damage
food security, water supplies. They lead
to an increase in vector-borne diseases,
Lyme disease, dengue. There's a whole
sweeping landscape of impacts that
scientists are warning will get worse if
emissions continue to go up.
I feel like what's quite remarkable
about the story that you've told here is
how quickly this country's relationship
to greenhouse gases, the idea that they
create climate change and that this is
something to be addressed by the
government, how quickly
really just in a decade and a half
that's changed. If you go back to the
mid early 2000s, when the endangerment
finding
was written,
it seemed like much of the business and
even political world
was starting to become aligned
in this sense that there was a problem
and that something could be done about
it. Hi, I'm Nancy Pelosi, lifelong
Democrat and Speaker of the House. And
I'm Newt Gingrich, lifelong Republican,
and I used to be Speaker. I'm sure you
remember the famous
ad where Nancy Pelosi and Newt Gingrich
were sitting on a couch together in
front of the Capitol. We don't always
see eye to eye, do we, Newt? No, but we
do agree our country must take action to
address climate change. And there wasn't
always going to be ever, of course,
agreement about what to do about it.
Businesses weren't thrilled about some
of the costs entailed in
changing their conduct, but
a lot of people got on board with the
idea
that something needed to be done. And
yet,
as you've explained here, a very
persistent group of ideologically
aligned climate change skeptics
kept at it through Republican and
Democratic presidencies and have
succeeded
in making
their view, which isn't necessarily the
nation's view, become the government's
official policy. And that's something to
behold.
It really is. And one of the things that
became clear as we were reporting this
story out is that this group of
conservative lawyers,
their views on climate change
were not in the mainstream even of their
own party.
But they were persistent and they did an
enormous amount of planning.
And that persistence
paid off in the form of President Trump.
>> [music]
>> Who,
you know, we all know his views on
climate change, calls it a hoax, calls
it a scam, and when President Trump was
elected, these two forces joined, and
they were ready to get this anti-climate
agenda done.
And later today, when the endangerment
finding is repealed,
it will be,
in the words of one climate contrarian,
total victory for their cause.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Well, Lisa,
thank you very much. Thanks so much.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
[music]
>> Here's what else you need to know today.
On Wednesday, the mystery [music]
surrounding the federal government's
decision to abruptly shut down the
airspace around El Paso, Texas,
originally for 10 [music] days, appeared
to be solved.
The Times reports that the closure was
announced after officials from US
Customs and Border Protection decided to
[music] try out a new anti-drone laser
technology in order to shoot at what
they believed was [music] a drone from
Mexican drug cartels.
But the Border Protection officials
failed to give officials from the
Federal Aviation Administration enough
time to assess the risks of the new
technology [music]
on commercial planes.
That prompted the FAA to shut down the
airspace [music]
before quickly reversing their own
decision.
And
>> [music]
>> How many of Epstein's co-conspirators
have you indicted? How many perpetrators
are you even investigating? First
[music]
you showed a I I find it
>> How many have you indicted?
>> me, I'm going to answer the question.
>> I answer my question.
>> No, I'm going to answer the question the
way I want to answer the question.
During a combative hearing on Wednesday
Democratic members of Congress sharply
[music] criticized Attorney General Pam
Bondi for her department's handling of
documents related [music] to Jeffrey
Epstein
and her repeated efforts to prosecute
enemies of [music] the president. You've
turned the people's Department of
Justice into Trump's [music] instrument
of revenge.
Trump orders up prosecutions like pizza
and you deliver every time. He tells you
to go after James Comey, Letitia James,
Lisa Tuck. Bondi forcefully defended her
actions frequently [music] interrupted
lawmakers and at times insulted them as
she did to Representative Jamie Raskin
of Maryland
>> [music]
>> when he instructed Bondi to stop
filibustering in response to questions
from Democrats. And I told you about
that Attorney [music] General before you
started.
>> tell me
>> Now I did tell you because we saw what
you did in the Senate.
Lady will be in order.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by Eric
[music] Krupke, Michael Simon Johnson
and Anna Foley.
It was edited by Maria Byrne and Devon
[music] Taylor, contains music by Alicia
Eubanks, Marion Lozano and Dan Powell
and was engineered by Chris Wood.
>> [music]
>> That's it for The Daily.
I'm Michael [music] Barbaro.
See you